# PSOCryptanalysis

A Python app for the cryptoanalysis of transposition strings using the PSO algorithm.

The algorithm uses a **swarm of particles** to generate different permutations of the coded string which are ranked by the value of the criterion function and then further improved.

There are three possible **criterion functions**:

- *bigram function* (which counts the differences between message and natural bigram frequencies);

- *trigram function* (which counts the differences between message and natural trigram frequencies);

- *quadgram function* (which counts the differences between message and natural quadgram frequencies).

## Features

1. **Calculating frequencies** of different types of blocks of characters in strings (single characters, bigrams, trigrams and quadgrams);

2. **Generating progressively better permutations** (when comparing frequencies of blocks of characters with natural frequencies) by using the following approach:

	Depending on the number of incorrectly positioned characters, a new permutation is generated by:

	- *swapping blocks of characters* that are correctly positioned;

	- *generating a random configuration* of the incorrectly positioned characters in hopes of achieving an overall better permutation.

	If no improvement can be achieved by either of the afore mentioned methods, the *size of the character block is increased* (bigram -> trigram -> quadgram) and the whole process repeated.

3. Coding and decoding the message using the **Caesar code** method.

## The Code

The code consists of three files:

1. *cryptoPSO.py*: contains the algorithm;

2. *gui.py*: contains the *Tkinter* User Interface for using the app;

3. *tests.py*: contains the tests for the app.

## Additional information

The goal of the algorithm is to **minimize** the criterion function (which describes the error between character block frequencies).

The coded message can consist only of **the uppercase letters of the English alphabet** (no other character is allowed).

The *SIMILARITY* variable determins the **precision of the criterion function** - the lower its value, the higher the possibility that the permutation of characters will be labeled as incorrect.

The number of particles and iterations should not be increased too much, because *mode 4* (finding quadgrams) has a very long execution time, because of which the algorithm will **considerably slow down**.

© Ehlimana Krupalija, 2019.

*University of Sarajevo*

*Faculty of Electrical Engineering*

*Department of Computing and Informatics*